---
title: 'write you a parser for okay acceptable!'
published: 2021-01-05
last: 2021-01-05
tags: haskell parsing language programming
---

Parsec is a beautiful library, but it's DIFFICULT. Every time I'm working on a problem that requires an actual parser beyond regex, I die a little inside. I used Parsec for my [Scheme interpreter](https://github.com/dreamsmasher/meme), and it was probably the most frustrating part of the project.

This isn't the fault of the authors, though. Parsers are complicated beasts, and I definitely didn't know what I was doing the first time around. 

There's an interesting problem on [Codewars](https://www.codewars.com/kata/52f831fa9d332c6591000511) - given an arbitrary molecule string, return the count of each constituent atom.

```haskell
CH3CO2H -- acetate
```

Sounds pretty simple, right? 

```haskell
import Data.Char (isDigit)
import Data.List
import Text.Read (readMaybe)
import Data.Maybe (fromMaybe)

parseMolec :: String -> [(Char, Int)]
parseMolec [] = []
parseMolec [c] = [(c, 1)]
parseMolec (c:cs) = let (ns, cs') = span isDigit cs
                     in (c, (fromMaybe 1 . readMaybe) ns) : parseMolec cs'

>>> parseMolec "CH3CO2H"
[('C',1),('H',3),('C',1),('O',2),('H',1)]
```

That's it, we're done. End of post.

Obviously, we're not done. Even organic chemists deal with atoms beyond C, H, O, N. 

```haskell
>>> parseMolec "Mg"
[('M', 1), ('g', 1)]
```
To make matters more complicated, chemists are just like programmers - lazy. For polymeric materials with repeating groups, there's a handy way to express their structure. For example, the formula for PVC is `C2H3Cl`. I guess that would just be VC - because it forms arbitrarily long chains, it's written as `(C2H3Cl)n`. What a tradeoff - chemists making their lives easier at our expense. If we had to parse something like

```haskell
CH3(CH2)2CONH2 -- butyramide
```

It seems like we can treat a group of parentheses as a subexpression on its own, multiplying every number by the coefficient that comes after it.

You can look at this notation as a form of [run-length encoding](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Run-length_encoding), where you express repeating substructures of data as pairs (s, n). It's the simplest form of data compression, and it's extremely easily to decode. Encoding it is slightly harder, especially when you consider that these expressions can be nested, e.g. 

```haskell
 K4(ON(SO3)2)2 -- Fremy's salt
```

Let's take a step back and write a (roughly) formal grammar for this problem.

```python
atom = uppercase, [lowercase], [number]
molecule = {atom | "(", molecule, ")", [number]}
```

In EBNF, curly braces denote repetition, and square brackets denote optionals. The regular expression is left as an exercise for the reader (i.e. I don't want to figure it out.)

We know that these expressions are recursive, so our parser is also going to be recursive. We consume an input string, apply these rules one character at a time, and treat the results of deeper recursive calls as atomic values. We'll also need to continue off from where the deeper recursive calls left off. 

Let's start off with a simple data type and work from there. We know that a parser is a function that will take in a `String`, and return some value from consuming that string, along with the remainder of the input. There's also a chance that our parser might fail, so we'll reflect this on the type level by wrapping the result in a `Maybe`. If we were doing something less trivial, we might use `Either` or `ExceptT` for more descriptive errors.

```haskell
newtype Parse a = P { runParse :: String -> Maybe (a, String) } 
```
Our `Parse`r type is just the `State` monad with the added possibility of failure. As we consume our string, we're going to thread around the input as we consume it. Let's try to turn our parser into a monad so we can do this implicitly.


```haskell
instance Functor Parse where
    fmap f p = P $ \s -> runParse p s >>= \(a, s') -> Just (f a, s')
```

The `>>=` in this case refers to our `Maybe` context - the `\(a, s')` function will only be applied if the parser action succeeds. This is where monads really shine, letting you sequence effects in a way that abstracts out the repetition of managing nested contexts. 

Any time you find yourself writing a lambda expression just to pass it as the first parameter of a monadic binding, you can usually abstract that away with a Kleisli fish. I mean arrow. 

```haskell
-- (>=>) :: Monad m => (a -> m b) -> (b -> m c) -> (a -> m c)

instance Functor Parse where
  fmap f p = P $ runParse p >=> \(a, s') -> Just (f a, s')
```

But: since every `Monad` is an `Applicative`, we can basically get all the lower classes for free. Even better.

``` haskell
instance Functor Parse where
  fmap = liftM 

instance Applicative Parse where
    (<*>) = ap
    pure = return

```

Now we have to actually write some code. We know that in order to qualify our data type as a Monad, it needs to fulfill the monadic laws and have a lawful implementation of `(>>=)` and `return`.

To put a value in the bare minimum context of a monad it shouldn't have any effects per se. In our case, `return` should be a parser that doesn't consume any input, and successfully yields a value regardless.

```haskell
instance Monad Parse where
  return :: a -> Parse a
  return x = P $ Just . (x , )
  -- return x = P $ \s -> Just (x, s)
```

The tricky part is figuring out what it means to `bind` a parser into the next. In order to get sequential evaluation of two parsers, `f` and `g`, `g` should be run on the remaining input from running `f`. If `f` fails to parse its input, then `g` should also fail.

```haskell
(>>=) :: Parse a -> (a -> Parse b) -> Parse b
p >>= f = P $ runParse p -- apply the function held by p 
            >=> \(a, s') -> -- if it succeeds, it will return a tuple (value, newState)
              let g = f a  -- when `f` is applied to `a`, it will yield a value of type `m b` 
               in runParse g s' -- i.e. (a P holding a function `String -> Maybe (b, String)`)
```

As usual, we can use arrows to make this a lot cleaner.
```haskell
(>>=) :: Parse a -> (a -> Parse b) -> Parse b
p >>= f = P $ runParse p >=> (first f >>> uncurry runParse) 

```

This is a little precarious, though. Parsing is a task, that more often that not, will fail. If a single parser is unable to successfully read a string, we'd like to be able to try an alternative function before giving up. Good thing this is already implemented for us. The `Alternative` instance for Maybe looks something like

``` haskell
instance Alternative Maybe where
  empty = Nothing
  Nothing <|> b = b
  Just a  <|> _ = Just a 
```

Where we only need to evaluate `b` if `a` is `empty`. You can think of `<|>` as `||` lifted to effectful types. If you squint hard enough, it looks like a stickbug. We'll call it that from here on out, but it's more like a `choice` operator if anything. In our case, if one parser succeeds, we don't need to try the other one. We can take advantage of the fact that functions are `Applicative`, and use `liftA2` to write the equivalent of `\s -> runParse a s <|> runParse b s`.

```haskell
instance Alternative Parse where
    empty = P (const Nothing)
    a <|> b = P $ liftA2 (<|>) (runParse a) (runParse b)
```

Now that we have a rudimentary state machine, we can write the basis for open-ended parsers. We only really need 3 simple primitives:

```haskell
-- we need to be able to consume a value from our input
anyChar :: Parse Char
anyChar = P $ \case []     -> Nothing
                    (x:xs) -> Just (x, xs)

-- we need to verify that we've parsed everything
eof :: Parse ()
eof = P $ \case [] -> Just ((), [])
                _  -> Nothing

-- we need to be able to conditionally fail
cond :: (a -> Bool) -> Parse a -> Parse a
cond b p = p >>= \x -> P $ 
  if b x then Just (x, s) else Nothing
```

Let's try this out on some simple inputs now:

```haskell
>>> runParse anyChar "hello"
Just ('h', "ello")

>>> runParse ( cond (\c -> c == 'z') anyChar ) "xello"
Nothing
```

A parser that parses unconditionally is boring, and a parser that only parses a single character is useless. Since we've defined instances for our parser type, we get a ton of functions for free.

We'll start off by defining something to parse a specific character (we already have):

```haskell
char :: Char -> Parser Char
char c = cond (== c) anyChar
```

then some more general selectors:

```haskell
upper, lower, digit :: Parse Char
upper = cond isUpper anyChar
lower = cond isLower anyChar
digit = cond isDigit anyChar
```

Now we have everything we need to parse a simple atom (again). `Control.Applicative` exports some really useful functions for `Alternative` types, like `optional`, `some`, and `many` that makes our lives a LOT easier. You can think of these functions as generalized versions of the regex qualifiers `?`, `+`, and `*`. Instead of transforming the match behaviour of a single pattern, they'll apply an `Alternative` action zero or one times, one or more times, or an unlimited amount. You can implement a regex engine using parser combinators and these operators pretty trivially, since monadic parsers are Turing-complete.

`Alternative` is extremely similar to `Monoid` -  `empty` is an identity element, such that 

```haskell
a :: Alternative f
empty <|> a = a
a <|> empty = empty
```

and the stickbug operator `<|>` is a binary associative function between two `Alternative`s:

```haskell
(a <|> b) <|> c = a <|> (b <|> c)
```

Where these types differ is that `Alternative` is biased towards the left argument - it's a *choice*, rather than a *composition*.

```haskell
>>> Nothing  <>  Nothing
Nothing
>>> Nothing  <|> Nothing
Nothing

>>> Nothing  <>  Just "i"
Just "i"
>>> Nothing  <|> Just "i"
Just "i"

>>> Just "H" <>  Nothing
Just "H"
>>> Just "H" <|> Nothing
Just "H"

>>> Just "H" <>  Just "i"
Just "Hi"
>>> Just "H" <|> Just "i"
Just "H"
```

`optional` is a function that takes an `Alternative` functor, runs its action, and returns a `Maybe` value inside the `Alternative` instead of returning `empty`. This has the advantage of always succeeding, so we can treat a failure as a slight speedbump instead of an error that has to be propagated forwards. 

```haskell
element :: Parse String
element = do
  up <- upper -- single character
  low <- maybeToList <$> optional lower -- either [] or a lowercase
  pure (up : low)
  
num :: Parse Int
num = read <$> some digit -- will only parse 1+ digits, so we don't *have* to use readMaybe

type Atoms = (String, Int)

atoms :: Parse Atoms
atoms = do
  el <- element
  n <- fromMaybe 1 <$> optional num -- no annotation = single atom
  pure (el, n)
```

Let's try this out now:

```haskell
>>> runParse atoms "MgOH2"
Just ("Mg", "H2O4")

>>> runParse atoms "H2O2"
Just (("H", 2), "O2")

>>> runParse atoms "Hi2You!!!"
Just (("Hi", 2), "You!!!")

>>> runParse (many atoms) "HaHaUNLeSS10"
Just ([("Ha",1),("Ha",1),("U",1),("N",1),("Le",1),("S",1),("S",10)],"")
```

Nice. We can parse simple atoms now, and sequences of them at that. We have parsers that will try to parse what they're given, giving up and not consuming anything if they fail. Let's recur now and try to tackle the nested repeating groups. It turns out that the problem is even more annoying, because the molecules can use any kind of bracket. `K4[ON{SO3}2]2` is fair game. It doesn't make that much of a difference really, we just have to make sure that brackets are paired correctly.

```haskell
-- take an arbitrary parser, returning a version that parses between matching brackets
bracket :: Parse a -> Parse a
bracket p = do
  c <- anyChar -- assume we're at an opening bracket
  p <* case c of '(' -> char ')'
                 '{' -> char '}'
                 '[' -> char ']' 
                 _   -> empty -- fail if c isn't actually a bracket
```

`<*` is like the flipped, `Applicative` version of `>>`. It runs both actions, ignoring the second's result but allowing its effects to propagate. If you find yourself doing something like

```haskell
betweenParens :: Parse a -> Parse a
betweenParens p = do
  char '('
  res <- p
  char ')'
  pure res
```

it helps to refactor using these `const` operators:

```haskell
betweenParens :: Parse a -> Parse a
betweenParens p = char '(' *> p <* char ')'
```

I generally prefer `(*>)` to `(>>)`, because you don't *always* need the power of a monad. We have both, largely because of historical reasons (`Applicative` came around after `Monad`).


Finally, our core, mutually recursive parsers - a functional group (in the chemical sense) is a molecule/atom within a pair of matching brackets, followed by an optional number:

```haskell
funcGroup :: Parse [Atoms]
funcGroup = do
  atomCounts <- concat $ bracket (some molecule) -- wrap the act of parsing one or more 
  n <- num <|> pure 1
  pure $ map ((* n) <$>) atomCounts
    -- multiply every coefficient by the outer multiplier

molecule :: Parse [Atoms]
molecule = concat <$> some ((pure <$> atoms) <|> funcGroup)

parse :: Parse a -> String -> Maybe a
parse p = runParse fed >=> pure . fst
  where fed = p <* eof -- assert input is entirely consumed after parsing
```

This is the power of parser combinators - you can build entire grammars out of simple primitives, and write as if every parser succeeds according to your specification. Traversing the input stream and error handling is abstracted away from you by the underlying monad, so your code ends up looking almost identical to your initial grammar.

Oh yeah, we need to get the total counts of each atom:

```
condense :: [Atoms] -> [Atoms]
condense = toList . Map.fromListWith (+)

parseMolecule :: String -> Maybe [Atoms]
parseMolecule s = (condense . fst) <$> parse molecule s
```

Testing Fremy's salt: 

```haskell
> parseMolecule "K4[ON(SO3)2]2" -- Fremy's salt
Just [("K",4),("O",14),("N",2),("S",4)]
```

This is the underlying basis of most parser combinator libraries like Parsec. Parsec allows you to integrate its parser monad into a monad transformer stack, and there's a lot more flexibility with regards to the type of your input stream and accumulating state parameter. It's way cleaner than manually writing specific parsers, and exponentially easier than `bison`/`happy`.

